IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022 7322511
Machine Learning Based Visible Light Indoor
Positioning With Single-LED and Single
Rotatable Photo Detector
Ren Liu, Zhonghua Liang , Senior Member , IEEE, Kuo Y ang ,a n dW e iL i , Member , IEEE
Abstract—In recent years, visible light positioning (VLP) systems
have attracted considerable attention because they do not require
additional infrastructures. However, most existing researches on
the VLP ignore the impact of wall diffuse reﬂection, which can lead
to the dramatical decrease of the position accuracy performance
near the indoor walls and corners. In this paper, we design an
indoor VLP system with one single light-emitting diode (LED)
and a rotatable photodetector (PD), and then propose an indoor
VLP algorithm based on machine learning (ML) methods with
concern for the indoor reﬂection of the optical propagation. The
proposed positioning process is implemented via two stages: area
classiﬁcation and positioning. During the area classiﬁcation stage,
by using the random forest (RF) algorithm, the entire room is
divided into one interior area and four wall or corner zones. In
the interior area, the rotatable PD is directly used to determine
the target location. In the four wall or corner zones, a hybrid po-
sitioning algorithm based on the extreme learning machine (ELM)
and the density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
(DBSCAN) is developed to improve localization accuracy near the
indoor walls and corners. Simulation results show that by using the
proposed indoor VLP system with the rotatable PD and the hybrid
algorithm, the maximum and averaged positioning errors of wall
or corner zones drop from 137.96 cm and 15.63 cm, to 38.34 cm
and 1.43 cm, respectively, and the averaged positioning error of the
whole room decreases from 11.97 cm to 1.74 cm.
Index Terms—Density-based spatial clustering of applications
with noise (DBSCAN), extreme learning machine (ELM), Internet
of things (IoT), random forest (RF), rotatable PD, single LED,
visible light positioning (VLP).
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N RECENT years, with the blooming of Internet of Things
(IoT) technologies [1], there have been gradually increased
requirements for the various services based on the location in-
formation. In outdoor environments, GPS or Beidou navigation
equipment can achieve accurate positioning [2]. However, the
indoor GPS signal could be weak or even be blocked due to
Manuscript received January 9, 2022; revised February 22, 2022; accepted
March 25, 2022. Date of publication March 30, 2022; date of current version
April 18, 2022. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Basic
Research Project in Shaanxi Province of China under Grant 2020JM-242, in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61871314,
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities,
CHD under Grant 300102249303. (Corresponding author: Zhonghua Liang.)
The authors are with the Department of Communication Engineering,
School of Information Engineering, Chang’an University, Xi’an, Shaanxi
710064, China (e-mail: 2019124004@chd.edu.cn; lzhxjd@hotmail.com;
17865519557@163.com; wli.chd@chd.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JPHOT.2022.3163415
the loss of satellite signals by obstructions from buildings and
it leads to low positioning accuracy [3]. Therefore, the more
reliable positioning systems are needed for indoor environments
[4]. Traditional indoor positioning techniques, such as WLAN,
UWB, and Bluetooth [5], [6], require additional infrastructures
[7]. Meanwhile, they are easy to cause electromagnetic signal
interference [8], and thus they are not suitable for the applica-
tions which are sensitive to electromagnetic signal interference.
Recently, the visible light communication (VLC) has become
one of the essential techniques for the oncoming 6G wireless
communications [9]. Therefore, the visible light positioning
(VLP) based on the VLC has become a promising technology
in the ﬁeld of the indoor positioning thanks to its inherent
advantages, such as no requirements to deploy additional in-
frastructures, low cost, and long service life [10], [11].
Most of the existing VLP systems are based on multiple
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and they exploit TDMA [12],
FDMA [13] or CDMA [14] technologies to avoid the mutual
interference among LEDs. In addition, these positioning systems
with multi-LED usually have high hardware complexity and
high cost. In contrast, the use of VLP system with single-LED
can avoid mutual interference among LED lights, the inﬂuence
of the multi-LED layout on positioning accuracy, and the waste
of LED light resources. Therefore, the VLP technology with
single-LED is more practical and it is more energy-efﬁcient
especially for a small room [2].
In recent years, the various VLC/VLP systems based on the
received signal strength (RSS) have been developed, in which
machine learning (ML) algorithms are widely employed, such
as the artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) [15], the convolutional
neural network (CNN) [16], the density-based spatial cluster-
ing of applications with noise (DBSCAN) [17], the ridge re-
gression (RR) [18], and the extreme learning machine (ELM)
[19]. These VLC/VLP systems have relatively better positioning
performance. However, most of them require a large number
of iterations for training the network, which lead to the higher
computational complexity.
In the indoor VLP technologies, the optical receivers are
generally comprised of photo detectors (PD) and image sensors.
For the single-LED positioning technologies, the receivers
equipped with multiple PDs are designed in [20], [21], and
the image sensors with high resolution are exploited to ob-
tain position parameters in [5], [22], [23]. However, recent
achievements in high-precision angle sensors have paved the
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

7322511 IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
way for the development of the single-PD positioning systems.
In this paper, we investigate the VLP system with single-LED
and single-PD [24], [25] where a rotatable PD measures the
relative angles with respect to the LED projection point as well
as the maximum or minimum RSS values. In practice, such a
VLP system can be a smart phone equipped with a compass
or a robot equipped with a motor rotating at a constant speed.
The horizontal distance between the platform and the LED
projection point is obtained by the measured RSS value. Our
major contributions are summarized as follows:
1) Firstly, the random forest (RF) classiﬁcation algorithm is
introduced to the VLP system so as to divide the measured
room into two parts: one interior area and four wall or
corner zones. For the interior area, the location of target
node (TN) can be directly determined ONL Y based on the
relative angle and the horizontal distance measured by the
rotatable PD.
2) For the four wall or corner zones, a hybrid positioning
algorithm based on the ELM and DBSCAN methods is
proposed, in which the trained ELM is ﬁrstly employed
to each wall or corner zone to obtain an estimation of the
target coordinates. Meanwhile, the rotatable platform will
be moved in a small area to re-estimate the coordinates
for some singular points and the DBSCAN algorithm is
used to ﬁnd the largest cluster of TN estimated coordinates
and weight the largest cluster to improve the positioning
accuracy.
It is worth noting that although the same ELM algorithm is
investigated for the VLP systems in both [19] and our work, there
are still two signiﬁcant differences between them as follows:
Firstly, in [19], the original ELM algorithm and ﬁngerprinting
are both employed in entire measured room to obtain an estima-
tion of the TN’s location. However, in our work, the proposed
hybrid ELM-DBSCAN algorithm is ONL Y used for four wall
or corner zones to improve the positioning accuracy, and for the
interior area, ONL Y the use of the rotatable positioning model
with single rotatable PD is sufﬁcient to determine the TN’s
location. By this means, when the RF classiﬁcation algorithm
is used to roughly estimate that the TN’s location belongs to
the interior area, it will make sense to reduce the computational
complexity without signiﬁcant loss in localization accuracy.
Secondly, in the ELM algorithm used in [19], the number of
input parameters, namely the received power values, depends
on the number of LEDs, which is strictly limited by hardware
complexity and cost. In our work, since the power value received
from any angle can be captured by the rotatable PD, the number
of inputs can be ﬂexibly selected according to the accuracy
requirements.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II we
present the background including system model, noise model
and the machine learning algorithms used in this paper. Then
we describe the rotatable VLP positioning model and the pro-
posed hybrid positioning algorithm in Section III. Furthermore,
simulation results are given in Section IV to demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed VLP algorithm. Finally, conclusions
are summarized in Section V.
Fig. 1. Indoor VLP system with single-LED and single rotatable PD.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. System Model
We consider an indoor scenario with single-LED illumination.
Fig. 1 illustrates the indoor VLP system with single-LED and
single rotatable PD. The modulated optical signal is transmitted
by the LED light installed at the center of the roof, and the rotat-
able platform (with blue highlighting) detects and demodulates
the received optical signal. The rotatable platform includes a
cylindrical body centered on the position of TN, and a rotating
arm equipped with an angle sensor and the PD. When viewed
from above, the horizontal arm rotates clockwise.
When the visible light signal is transmitted indoors, it is
easy to be reﬂected by indoor facilities or walls, and thus
there appears multiple reﬂection signals which can decrease
the position accuracy. In this paper, we assume that the ﬁrst
order non-line-of-sight (NLOS) component dominates all NLOS
reﬂection components, which is one of typical cases for indoor
VLC or VLP channel modeling reported in [26]. 1
We assume that the propagation of visible light in space
follows the Lambert radiation model, in which the order of
Lambert emission m and the channel DC gain H(0) can be
given as follows [29]:
m = −ln2
ln(cosφ1/2), (1)
H(0) =
{ (m+1)A
2πd2 F1(φ2,ψ 2)0 ≤ ψ2 ≤ ψc
0 ψ2 >ψ c, (2)
where F1(φ2,ψ 2)=c o sm(φ2)Ts(ψ2)g(ψ2)cos(ψ2), φ1/2 is
the half power angle of the LED, A represents the active area
1Such an assumption does not represent all typical indoor VLC or VLP
scenarios because there should be other typical cases for indoor VLC or VLP
channel modeling, such as those presented in [27] and [28].

LIU et al.: MACHINE LEARNING BASED VISIBLE LIGHT INDOOR POSITIONING WITH SINGLE-LED AND SINGLE ROTATABLE PHOTO DETECTOR 7322511
of the PD at the receiver, d is the distance between the LED
and the PD, φ2 and ψ2 denote the angle of irradiance and the
angle of incidence between the LED and the PD, respectively
(When the PD is placed horizontally, φ2 and ψ2 are equal). ψc
represents the ﬁeld-of-view of the receiver. Ts(ψ) is the gain
of an optical ﬁlter, g(ψ) is the gain of an optical concentrator,
which is expressed as [30]:
g(ψ)= n2
sin2 ψc
, (3)
where n is the refractive index. For convenience of expression,
we only consider the reﬂection of walls and therefore the DC
gain of a primary reﬂection from a reﬂective surface of area dA
is given by [31]:
Hre(0) =
{ (m+1)A
2π2d2
1d2
2
ρcosm(φ1)F2(α,β,ψ 1)0 ≤ ψ1 ≤ ψc
0 ψ1 >ψ c,
(4)
where F2(α,β,ψ 1)= dA cos(α)cos(β)Ts(ψ1)g(ψ1)cos(ψ1),
d1 represents the distance from the LED to the reﬂection point,
d2 is the distance between the reﬂection point and the PD, ρ
is the reﬂection factor, dA denotes the reﬂection area, φ1 and
α respectively indicate the irradiance angle and incident angle
of the reﬂection point, respectively. β andψ1 are the irradiance
angle and incident angle of the PD, respectively.
The optical power received by the PD can be calculated as:
Popt = Pt ×
⎡
⎣H(0)+
4∑
j=1
mj∑
i=1
Hij
re(0)
⎤
⎦, (5)
wherePt is the optical emission power,j andmj are the identi-
ﬁcation(ID) number of walls and the total number of reﬂectors
with area dA on the j-th wall, respectively. Hij
re(0) represents
the DC gain of the primary reﬂection from the i-th reﬂecting
surface of the j-th wall.
B. Noise Model
In the VLP system, the noise usually can be divided into
two parts: thermal noise and shot noise. Thermal noise mainly
includes feed-back impedance noise and ﬁeld effect pipe noise.
Shot noise is mainly related to background current originated
from background light or sunlight. The electrical power received
by the PD includes the electrical power converted from optical
power and the noise power, and thus it can be deﬁned as [25]:
Pel =( Rp ×Popt)2 +δ2
noise, (6)
where Rp denotes the PD responsiveness. δ2
noise is the sum of
the variances of shot noise and thermal noise, and it can be
expressed as:
δ2
noise = δ2
shot +δ2
thermal. (7)
The variance of shot noise δ2
shot can be obtained from [32]:
δ2
shot =2 qRpPoptB +2qIbgI2B, (8)
where Ibg is dark current generated by background light, q
denotes electronic charge, I2 indicates noise bandwidth factor,
B represents equivalent noise bandwidth.
The variance of thermal noise δ2
thermal is given by [32]:
δ2
thermal = 8πkTk
G CpdAI2B2 + 16π2kTkΓ
gm
C2
pdA2I3B3,
(9)
where Tk is absolute temperature, k denotes Boltzmann’s con-
stant,Cpd represents the ﬁxed capacitance of the photo detector
per unit area, G is open-loop voltage gain, gm denotes the FET
transconductance, Γ is FET noise factor, I3 is noise bandwidth
impact factor.
C. Algorithms Investigated in This Paper
1) RF Classiﬁcation Algorithm: The RF classiﬁcation algo-
rithm does not require too many parameters, and thus it can be
used in different ﬁelds. Because this algorithm randomly selects
data and features, it has good anti-noise performance without
over-ﬁtting.
The RF algorithm is a ML method based on integrated
learning, in which multiple decision trees are used for each
forest as training samples. Moreover, the new sample will be
given a classiﬁcation value. Then, the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result
is obtained based on the principle that the minority obeys the
majority. The voting decision process is given as [33], [34]:
H(x)= argmax
Y
k∑
i=1
I(hi(x)= Y), (10)
where H(x) represents a combined classiﬁcation model, hi is
single decision tree, Y is the output variable and I(·) denotes
indicator function. The implementation steps of the RF classiﬁ-
cation algorithm are provided in Appendix A.
2) ELM Algorithm: The ELM algorithm is a feed-forward
neural network algorithm based on a single hidden layer, which
has the advantages of fast learning speed and good generalization
performance. Compared with the ELM, the traditional feed-
forward neural network has a slow training speed and is easy
to appear as a local minimum. Moreover, the ELM algorithm
randomly generates the connection weights of the input layer to
the hidden layer and the threshold of the hidden layer neurons.
When using it, only the number of hidden layer neurons and
the type of activation function need to be set to ﬁnd the unique
optimal solution. It can be used for classiﬁcation and ﬁtting of
data [19], [34].
Suppose the given feedforward neural network has L hid-
den neurons and N training samples (xi, yj), where xi =
[xi1,xi2,...,x in]T ∈ Rn and yi =[ yi1,yi2,...,y im]T ∈ Rm,
n andm are the numbers of input layer and output neurons.
Mathematical model of the ELM algorithm can be described
as [35]:
fL(xj)=
L∑
i=1
βig(ωixj + bi)= yj,j =1 ,2,..,N, (11)

7322511 IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
whereωi =[ωi1,ωi2,...,ω in]T , is the input weight from the in-
put layer to the i-th hidden node, and βi =[βi1,βi2,...,β im]T ,
represents the output weight from the i-th hidden node to the
output layer and bi denotes the bias of thei-th hidden node.g(·)
refers to the activation function. (11) can be expressed in matrix
form:
Hβ = Y, (12)
where
H=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
g(ω1x1 +b1) g(ω2x1 +b2) ··· g(ωLx1 +bL)
g(ω1x2 +b1) g(ω2x2 +b2) ··· g(ωLx2 +bL)
... ... . . . ...
g(ω1xN +b1) g(ω2xN +b2) ··· g(ωLxN +bL)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
β =[ βT
1 ,βT
2 ,..., βT
L]T , Y =[ yT
1 , yT
2 ,..., yT
L]T , H repre-
sents the output matrix of the hidden layer neuron, Y is the
expected output vector. Using the least square method, the ELM
model is trained to ﬁnd an estimated β minimizing the error,
which can be calculated as:
ˆβ = H+Y, (13)
where H+ represents the generalized inverse of the matrix H.
The implementation process of the ELM algorithm is presented
in Appendix B.
3) DBSCAN Algorithm: The DBSCAN algorithm is a
density-based clustering algorithm. This clustering algorithm
generally assumes that the category can be determined by the
tightness of the sample distribution. Samples of the same cate-
gory are closely connected to each other. In other words, there
must be samples of the same type not far from any sample of
that category.
Compared with the traditional K-means algorithm, the DB-
SCAN does not need to specify the number of categories. It
can ﬁnd clusters of any shape, and discover abnormal points
while clustering, and is not sensitive to abnormal points in
the data set. DBSCAN just needs to jointly adjust the two
parameters: the distance thresholdε and the threshold of number
of neighborhood sampleMinPts , which have signiﬁcant effect
on the clustering performance [17]. The entire procedure of the
DBSCAN algorithm is given in Appendix C.
III. VLP S YSTEM
A. Rotatable Positioning Model
In the designed rotatable positioning platform with single-PD,
it is assumed that the height of the positioning platform is con-
stant. The positioning platform needs to obtain two parameters
from the received signal by the PD: one is the horizontal distance
from the PD to the LED projection point, and the other is the
relative angle between the PD and the LED projection point with
respect to the zero-degree line [24]. The principle of rotatable
positioning model is shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, Dh refers to
the horizontal distance between the PD and the LED projection
point (the yellow pentagram), and it can be deﬁned as:
Dh =
√
d2 −(H −h)2, (14)
Fig. 2. Principle of the rotatable positioning model.
where d denotes the distance between the PD and the LED and
it can be computed by the RSS values, H is the height of the
room, and h refers to the height of rotatable platform as shown
in Fig. 1.
The PD rotates clockwise along the zero-degree line with
a constant angular velocity ω, and T is deﬁned as the signal
sampling interval of the PD. The power values of the electrical
signal sampled by the PD in one rotation cycle can be described
as:
P =[ P(0) P(ωT){... }P(ωn1T)], (15)
wheren1 +1 represents the number of the samples in one cycle.
When the PD rotates around the TN, the received optical
power ﬂuctuates with the varying distance from the LED to the
PD. When the PD is facing the LED, the received power reaches
the maximum with the relative angle θ = θ1. Conversely,
when the PD is facing away from the LED, the received power
is the minimum with the relative angle θ = θ2.F r o mF i g .2 ,w e
see that the absolute angle difference |θ2 −θ1| = π in theory.2
Therefore,θ1 andθ2 can be obtained by
θ1 = arg max
θ=iTω
(P) (16)
and
θ2 = arg min
θ=jTω
(P), (17)
respectively.
Using the obtained θ1 and θ2 values, the four coordinates of
the TN can be obtained as:
x1 = x0 +(Dh +l)sin θ1, (18)
y1 = y0 +(Dh +l)cos θ1, (19)
2However, the measured value of the absolute angle difference may not be π
in practice.

LIU et al.: MACHINE LEARNING BASED VISIBLE LIGHT INDOOR POSITIONING WITH SINGLE-LED AND SINGLE ROTATABLE PHOTO DETECTOR 7322511
Fig. 3. Area classiﬁcation with the hybrid positioning algorithm.
x2 = x0 −(Dh −l)sin θ2, (20)
y2 = y0 −(Dh −l)cos θ2, (21)
where (x1,y 1) and (x2,y 2) represent the estimated position
coordinates of the TN, respectively. (x0,y 0) denotes the co-
ordinates of the LED projection point, and l refers to the length
of the rotating arm. Therefore, the estimated position of the TN
can be expressed as:
ˆx =( x1 +x2)/2, (22)
ˆy =( y1 +y2)/2. (23)
The positioning error can be recorded as:
E =
√
(ˆx−xture)2 +(ˆy −yture)2, (24)
where(xture,yture) denotes the true location coordinates of the
TN.
B. Proposed Hybrid Positioning Algorithm
Based on the above discussions, we see that even if the
rotatable positioning model is used, the positioning error near
the walls or corners will be still large since the impact of the
wall diffuse reﬂection on the location accuracy should not be
neglected. In order to tackle this problem, the measured room can
be divided into two areas: interior area and wall or corner area.
If the TN belongs to the interior area, the rotatable positioning
model can be directly used. If the TN is located in the wall
or corner area, the more efﬁcient positioning algorithm can be
developed to improve the positioning accuracy.
Moreover, in order to obtain high positioning accuracy, the
wall or corner area can be further divided into four zones, each
of which contains a corner of the room. Accordingly, as shown
in Fig. 3, the entire room can be divided into ﬁve zones: four
wall or corner zones (#1−#4), and the interior area (#5).I n
Algorithm 1: Hybrid Positioning Algorithm.
Inputs: InitialL1, [ωi, bi,βi],f o ri =1 ,2,3,4, N , ε,
MinPts ,f(·), R = ∅, and c.
1: Received power
P1=[P0,P 60,P 120,P 180,P 240,P 300]T ;
2: Obtain the estimated index by performing RF
classiﬁcation;
3: Ifindex = 5, calculate X with rotatable positioning
model. Otherwise, calculate X by ELM using P1 in
index subarea.
4: If X is in the area of Subarea ( index), store X into R,
go to step 1, repeat L1 times. Otherwise, move the
position of the rotatable platform, go to step 1, repeat L1
times;
5: If the number of elements of R is greater than or equal
to c, perform clustering using DBSCAN;
a) If the result of step 5 is all noise, the clustering fails,
X =[ −1−1]T , jump back to step 1, R = ∅.
b) Otherwise, select the cluster that contains the largest
number of coordinates to estimate the weighted
coordinates;
6: If the number of elements of R is less than c,
X =[ −2−2]T ;
Outputs: Position of TN X.
this paper, the RF classiﬁcation algorithm is used to divide the
whole room into ﬁve area or zones using the received power
values from different angles and then roughly estimate which
area or zone the TN belongs to.
If the TN is estimated to be located in the interior area, the
rotatable positioning model can be directly used to determine its
coordinates. If the TN is estimated to be located in any of the four
wall or corner zones, a hybrid algorithm based on the ELM and
the DBSCAN is developed to estimate the coordinates of the TN
position. The main idea of the hybrid algorithm can be explained
as follows. The ELM algorithm is effective for determining most
positions in the zone, except for a few singular points whose
estimated positions drift across the boundary of the zone. When
one or more singular points are detected, these singular points
will be replaced by their adjacent perturbation points at random
and this means re-moving the rotatable device to receive power in
a small area. Theoretically, the coordinate points of the rotatable
platform near the TN should be gathered together after being
positioned by ELM. The DBSCAN algorithm can be used to
ﬁnd the coordinate points that are clustered together and ﬁnd the
largest number of clusters weighted to determine the location of
TN.
Assuming that the largest cluster detected by the DBSCAN
clustering algorithm contains M coordinates, they can be ex-
pressed as C =[ (x1,y 1),(x2,y 2),..., (xM,yM)]T . The cen-
troid (¯x,¯y) of the coordinate set C can be given by:
(¯x,¯y)=
(
1
M
M∑
i=1
xi, 1
M
M∑
i=1
yi
)
. (25)

7322511 IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
Fig. 4. Block diagram of the three machine learning algorithms used in this
paper.
Fig. 5. Block diagram of the proposed hybrid positioning algorithm.
The Euclidean distance D from the points in the set to the
centroid can be calculated as:
Di =
√
(xi − ¯x)2 +(yi − ¯y)2,i =1 ,2,..,M. (26)
The weight of each coordinate can be expressed as K =
[k1,k 2,..,k M], where ki fori =1 ,2,...,M is given as:
ki = e−Di
∑M
i=1 e−Di
. (27)
The ﬁnal estimated coordinates X can be expressed as:
X = KC. (28)
The block diagram of the proposed hybrid positioning al-
gorithm and the input and input of the three machine learning
algorithms used in this paper are shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 4,
respectively. In addition, the symbols used in the proposed
hybrid positioning algorithm and the corresponding descriptions
are provided in Table I. Finally, Algorithm 1 provides the im-
plementation process of the hybrid ML positioning algorithm,
in whichX =[ −1−1]T andX =[ −2−2]T do not represent
any actual position, where the former is used as a meaning of the
TABLE I
PARAMETER DESCRIPTION
TABLE II
SIMULA TIONPARAMETER
clustering failed, and the latter is used as an indicator of error
area-classiﬁcation.
IV . SIMULA TIONRESULTS
In order to evaluate the positioning performance of the pro-
posed VLP system with single-LED and single rotatable PD
based on the proposed rotatable positioning model and hybrid
positioning algorithm, the computer simulations are carried
out in a 4 m×4m×3.1m indoor scenario using MA TLAB
platform. As shown in Fig. 1, the position coordinates of the
LED light is set as (2,2,3.1), the height of the rotatable device
h =0 .1 m, the length of the rotating arm l = 0.05 ∼ 0.20 m,
the emission power of the LED Pt = 100 W, the PD area
A = 10 cm2, the half power angle φ1/2 =6 0◦, the PD’s angle
of view ψc =6 0◦, and the PD responsiveness Rp =0 .54 A/W.
Because l =0 .05 ∼ 0.20 m, the rotatable device cannot reach
the area within0.05 ∼ 0.20 m away from the wall, and thus this
area is not considered in the simulation. Similar to the parameter
settings presented in [26], [32], [36], some important parameters
related to the system model and the noise model are provided in
Table II.3
In order to train the RF and ELM algorithms, the training
data is collected at 6 cm spaces in the different positions of
3It is noted that in this paper, we consider an indoor VLC system integrating
lighting, communication and positioning functions, which has the potential to
be a promising solution for future indoor VLC scenarios. In such a system,
the date rate can reach several hundreds of megabits per second or higher, and
thus the equivalent noise bandwidth can also reach hundreds of megahertz or
more. Similarly, the equivalent noise bandwidth presented in [32] is as high as
800 MHz. Therefore, in Table II we set B = 400 MHz denoting a moderate
equivalent noise bandwidth for the investigated VLC system.

LIU et al.: MACHINE LEARNING BASED VISIBLE LIGHT INDOOR POSITIONING WITH SINGLE-LED AND SINGLE ROTATABLE PHOTO DETECTOR 7322511
Fig. 6. Distribution of electrical power in the measured room.
Fig. 7. Fitting results of polynomials with different order.
the room, and thus there are totally 4225 sets of data. Each
training data set includes 6 electric power values received at
integer multiples of 60-degree compared to 0◦ line respectively,
2 coordinate values of the TN, and the information about the
target-afﬁliated zone. Moreover, the 6 electric power values are
collected as a set of tested data at 5 cm spaces in the room, and
thus there are are 5929 sets of tested data in total. Based on
the collected electric power values, the ELM values in different
regions are trained separately in different wall or corner zones.
In addition, the activation function of ELM is set to sigmoidal
function and the number of hidden layer neurons is set to 200.
Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the received electrical power
values in the PD. We see that the closer the position of the PD is to
the center of the room, the greater the electrical power received
by the PD. The maximum, minimum and average of the electrical
power values are equal to −13.8698 dBm, −22.3297 dBm and
−17.1502, respectively.
In order to demonstrate the relationship of the received electric
power and the slope distance between PD and LED, we collected
data every 4 cm along the diagonal of the room (from one corner
to the projection point of the LED) and obtained totally 50 sets of
data. Based on the obtained 50 sets of data, the ﬁtting results of
polynomials with different orders are shown in Fig. 7, we see that
Fig. 8. Inﬂuence of the length of rotating arm on averaged positioning error
of the rotatable positioning model.
Fig. 9. Positioning error distribution of rotatable positioning model (LOS).
the degree of ﬁtting increases with the order of the polynomial.
When the order of the polynomial is 4, the degree of ﬁtting can
be satisﬁed. Therefore, in the following simulations, the highest
order of the ﬁtting curve is set as four.
Fig. 8 presents the averaged positioning error of the rota-
tional positioning model under the consideration of the different
lengths of the rotating arml. We see that the averaged positioning
error in the measured room is minimized when l = 10 cm.
Moreover, when the length of the rotating arm l< 10 cm, the
shorter the rotating arm is, the higher the positioning error is
(due to the limited space, the results for the case l< 5c m
is not presented in Fig. 8). This is mainly because a shorter
rotating arm usually results in a smaller variation range of the
power received by the PD, and thus the estimation error of
the relative angle values (16) and (17) increases, and so does the
positioning error. Therefore, if the measured area is too small
for the proposed positioning system with a rotating arm 5 cm or
more, other positioning devices need to be considered. In this
sense, the proposed VLP system is more suitable for positioning
in a medium-sized area, such as a small warehouse, or a nursing
room. In the following simulations, we always let l = 10 cm.

7322511 IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
Fig. 10. Positioning error distribution with and without the hybrid positioning algorithm. (a) Without the hybrid positioning algorithm. (b) With t he hybrid
positioning algorithm.
Using the ﬁtting data shown in Fig. 7, the distributions of
positioning error in the measured room are presented in Fig. 9
for the case of line-of-sight (LOS) and in Fig. 10(a) for the NLOS
case, respectively. From Fig. 9, we see that the positioning error
of most locations in the measured room is below 10 cm in the
LOS case.4 By comparing Figs. 9 and 10(a), we see that there is
an obvious gap in positioning error between the LOS and NLOS
cases, and thus the effect of reﬂected path can be observed.
From Fig. 10(a), we also see that the closer the position of the
PD is to the walls or the corners, the higher the positioning error
is. Particularly, when the position is less than 1m away from the
walls or the corners, the error becomes extremely large. Based
on the simulation results, we found that the positioning error
drops at the minimum 9.76 cm at the center of the room, and it
reaches the maximum 137.96 cm near the corners. The averaged
positioning error of the entire room is about 11.97 cm. Moreover,
for 90% and 50% of the positions, the positioning error is less
than 27 cm and 5 cm, respectively. Therefore, the width and the
length of each wall or corner zones can be taken as 1 m and 3
meters, respectively (As shown in Fig. 3,a =1 m andb =3 m).
Fig. 10(b) presents the positioning error distribution of the
proposed hybrid positioning algorithm. Compared to the results
shown in Fig. 10(a), we see that by using the proposed hybrid
positioning algorithm, the positioning error of the entire room
drops dramatically. Particularly, within the wall or corner
zones, the maximum error drops from 137.96 cm to 38.34 cm,
and the averaged error decreases from 15.63 cm to 1.43 cm.
Correspondingly, the averaged positioning error of the whole
room decreases to 1.74 cm.
Fig. 11 provides the classiﬁcation accuracy of the RF al-
gorithm by considering the different numbers of the decision
tree. We see that the accuracy increases with the number of the
decision trees. Especially, after the number of the decision trees
is no less than 99, the accuracy converges to about 95.5%.
4The positioning error near the central area is relatively high because when
the position of the TN is close to the position of the LED projection point, the
difference in power received by the PD for one rotation is very small, which will
lead to a large error in the relative angle.
Fig. 11. Relationship between the accuracy of the RF classiﬁcation algorithm
and the number of decision trees.
Fig. 12 illustrates an example of clustering results using the
DBSCAN algorithm. The sampled location[0.6,0.1] belongs to
the wall or corner zone #1, and it is detected as a singular point
since the estimated location drifts across the boundary of the
zone. Therefore, by using the DBSCAN algorithm, the seven
estimated coordinates of TN (deﬁned as noise in this paper) that
deviate from the true coordinates of TN will be removed, and
the largest cluster which including the eight red cross points can
be used to estimate the target location.
Fig. 13 provides the cumulative error function of the four wall
or corner zones by using the rotatable positioning model with
and without the proposed hybrid positioning algorithm. We see
that by using the hybrid positioning algorithm, the positioning
error is less than 3 cm in 90% of the wall or corner zones.
Finally, we compare the performance of the proposed
hybrid ML positioning algorithm and the other ML algorithms
in the Table III, in which the number of required LEDs and the
average positioning error are compared for six investigated ML
algorithms. We see that the DBSCAN algorithm [17] has the best

LIU et al.: MACHINE LEARNING BASED VISIBLE LIGHT INDOOR POSITIONING WITH SINGLE-LED AND SINGLE ROTATABLE PHOTO DETECTOR 7322511
TABLE III
ACCURACY COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND OTHER MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR WORK AND OTHER EXISTING CAMERA-BASED VLP SYSTEMS WITH SINGLE LED
Fig. 12. An example of clustering results using the DBSCAN algorithm
(ε = 0.08 m, MinPts = 6).
Fig. 13. Cumulative error function of the wall or corner zones using the
rotatable positioning model with and without the proposed hybrid positioning
algorithm.
positioning performance, but it requires 25 LEDs. Our proposed
hybrid ML algorithm only needs the minimum number of LEDs.
Moreover, compared to the ANN [15] and ELM [19] algorithms,
it possesses much better positioning performance. Therefore,
our proposed hybrid ML algorithm achieves a good trade-off
between positioning accuracy and implementation cost, and
it can be used as an alternative to high precision positioning
algorithms for cost-sensitive applications.
Table IV shows the comparison between our work and other
camera-based schemes with single LED in terms of time con-
sumption, average accuracy, LED-coverage and dimension. It
can be seen that the accuracy of our proposed system is the best.
However, the beneﬁt in accuracy comes at the expense of time
consumption. Although the proposed positioning system can
be accelerated in practice via optimized hardware design, it is
more suitable for those indoor applications that are not sensitive
to positioning delay. For example, when an elderly person with
limited mobility seeks help in a nursing home, the proposed po-
sitioning system can be used to locate or track his/her movement
trajectory at regular intervals. Moreover, a robot equipped with
this positioning system can also be used in a small warehouse to
detect changes in temperature or humidity at desired locations.
Moreover, a robot equipped with this positioning system can also
be used in a small warehouse to detect changes in temperature
or humidity at desired locations.
Simulation results show that our proposed scheme works well
in small rooms. However, if our proposed scheme is used in
a very large room, there should be two concerns need to be
addressed. Firstly, due to the acquisition of massive training
data for machine learning, a very large room could pose a
relatively high processing latency which is not conducive to the
implementation of a real-time positioning system. Moreover,
in a very large room equipped with single LED, the lighting
power may be insufﬁcient to provide both effective lighting and
accurate positioning.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a ML algorithm based VLP system with single-
LED and single PD is proposed for indoor localization scenarios.
In the VLP system, a rotatable positioning model is used to deter-
mine the target node’s location in the interior area. Particularly, a
hybrid ML-based positioning algorithm is proposed to improve
the positioning accuracy near the walls or corners. Simulation
results show that by using the rotatable positioning model in con-
junction with the hybrid positioning algorithm, the positioning
error of the entire room decreases signiﬁcantly. Therefore, the
proposed VLP algorithm is a promising solution for the indoor
high-precision localization applications with low cost.

7322511 IEEE PHOTONICS JOURNAL, VOL. 14, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
Algorithm 2: ELM Algorithm.
Inputs: Training sample set (xi, yi),i =1 ,...,N ,
number of hidden neurons L and activation function
g(·).
1: Randomly generate ωi and bi,i =1 ,...,L ;
2: Calculate H using (12);
3: Calculate ˆβ using (13);
Outputs: Output the estimated weight ˆβ.
Algorithm 3: DBSCAN Algorithm.
Inputs: Sample set
D =[ (x1,y 1),(x2,y 2),..., (xm,ym)], neighborhood
parameter(ε,MinPts ), deﬁnition the distance.
1: Initialize the core object collection Ω= ⊘, number of
clustersk =0 , unvisited sample collection Γ= D, and
cluster partition c = ⊘;
2: Perform steps (a) and (b) for j =1 ,2,...,m , to ﬁnd
all core objects;
a)F i n dt h eε-neighborhood subsample set Nε(xj,yj) of
the sample (xj,yj) by calculating the distance of
deﬁnition.
b) If the number of subsample sets is greater than or
equal to MinPts , add the samples (xj,yj) to the core
object sample sets: Ω=Ω ∪(xj,yj).
3: IfΩ= ⊘, the algorithm ends, otherwise go to step 4;
4: Randomly select a core object o in Ω, initialize the
current cluster core object queue Ωcur = {o}, category
numberk = k +1 , current cluster sample set
Ck = {o}, unvisited sample collection Γ=Γ −{o};
5: IfΩcur = ⊘, generate cluster Ck, update the core
object collection Ω=Ω −Ck,g ot os t e p3 ;
6: Take out a core object o′inΩcur , ﬁnd the
ε-neighborhood subsample set Nε(o′),l e t
Δ= Nε(o′)∩Γ, update Ck = Ck ∪Δ, Γ=Γ −Δ,
Ωcur =Ω cur ∪(Δ∩Ω)−o′,g ot os t e p5 ;
Outputs: Cluster partition c = {C1,C 2,...,C k}.
APPENDIX A
IMPLEMENTA TIONST E P SO FT H ERF CLASSIFICA TION
ALGORITHM
The implementation steps of the RF classiﬁcation algorithm
are summarized as follows [33]:
Step 1: Randomly select p training samples from the original
training set with replacement and generate q training sets after
q selections;
Step 2: The q training sets selected in the ﬁrst step above are
used to train q decision tree models;
Step 3: Theseq decision trees can construct a random forest;
Step 4: The new test sequence is voted by q decision trees to
produce the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result.
APPENDIX B
IMPLEMENTA TIONPROCESS OF THE ELM ALGORITHM
The implementation steps of training the ELM algorithm are
as shown in Algorithm 2.
APPENDIX C
PROCEDURE OF THE DBSCAN ALGORITHM
The procedure of the DBSCAN algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 3.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Y ang, W.-D. Zhong, C. Chen, A. Alphones, and P . Du, “QoS-driven
optimized design-based integrated visible light communication and posi-
tioning for indoor IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 269–283, Jan. 2020.
[2] H. Cheng, C. Xiao, Y . Ji, J. Ni, and T. Wang, “A single LED visible light
positioning system based on geometric features and CMOS camera,”IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 32, no. 17, pp. 1097–1100, Sep. 2020.
[3] Y .-C. Wu et al., “Using linear interpolation to reduce the training samples
for regression based visible light positioning system,” IEEE Photon. J. ,
vol. 12, no. 2, Apr. 2020, Art. no. 7901305.
[4] A. H. A. Bakar, T. Glass, H. Y . Tee, F. Alam, and M. Legg, “Accurate
visible light positioning using multiple-photodiode receiver and machine
learning,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[5] Y . Liu, F. Wang, J. Ding, and N. Chi, “A single LED multi-reception
indoor visible light position system based on power estimation-angle
algorithm,” inProc. Int. Symp. Intell. Signal Process. Commun. Syst., 2018,
pp. 363–367.
[6] H. Li et al., “A fast and high-accuracy real-time visible light positioning
system based on single LED lamp with a beacon,”IEEE Photon. J., vol. 12,
no. 6, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 7906512.
[7] S. Ma, Q. Liu, and P . C.-Y . Sheu, “Foglight: Visible light-enabled indoor
localization system for low-power IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 175–185, Feb. 2018.
[8] Y . Hou, Y . Xue, C. Chen, and S. Xiao, “A RSS/AOA based indoor
positioning system with a single LED lamp,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless
Commun. Signal Process., 2015, pp. 1–4.
[9] M. Katz and I. Ahmed, “Opportunities and challenges for visible light
communications in 6G,” in Proc. 2nd 6G Wireless Summit, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[10] X. Guo, F. Hu, N. R. Elikplim, and L. Li, “Indoor localization using visible
light via two-layer fusion network,”IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 16421–16430,
2019.
[11] Y . S. Eroglu, F. Erden, and I. Guvenc, “Adaptive Kalman tracking for
indoor visible light positioning,” inProc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., 2019,
pp. 331–336.
[12] S.-W. Ho, A. A. Saed, L. Lai, and C. W. Sung, “Coding and bounds for
channel estimation in visible light communications and positioning,”IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 34–44, Jan. 2018.
[13] H. Zheng, Z. Xu, C. Y u, and M. Gurusamy, “Asychronous visible light
positioning system using FDMA and ID techniques,” inProc. Conf. Lasers
Electro-Opt. Paciﬁc Rim, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[14] Y .-A. Chen, Y .-T. Chang, Y .-C. Tseng, and W.-T. Chen, “A framework
for simultaneous message broadcasting using CDMA-based visible light
communications,” IEEE Sensors J. , vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 6819–6827,
Dec. 2015.
[15] S. Ni, F. Wang, S. Han, J. Pang, and S. Y ou, “Two methods of accurate
indoor positioning based on visible light communication system and
artiﬁcial neural network,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Opt. Commun. Netw. ,
2019, pp. 1–3.
[16] B. Zhou and R. Wichman, “Visible light-based robust positioning under
detector orientation uncertainty: A gabor convolutional network-based ap-
proach extracting stable texture features,” inProc. IEEE 30th Int. Workshop
Mach. Learn. Signal Process., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[17] A. Gradim, P . Fonseca, L. N. Alves, and R. E. Mohamed, “On the usage
of machine learning techniques to improve position accuracy in visible
light positioning systems,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Commun. Syst. Netw.
Digital Signal Process., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[18] C.-Y . Hong et al., “Angle-of-arrival (AOA) visible light positioning (VLP)
system using solar cells with third-order regression and ridge regression
algorithms,”IEEE Photon. J., vol. 12, no. 3, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 7902605.
[19] Y . Chen, W. Guan, J. Li, and H. Song, “Indoor real-time 3-D visible light
positioning system using ﬁngerprinting and extreme learning machine,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 13875–13886, 2020.
[20] S.-H. Y ang, E.-M. Jung, and S.-K. Han, “Indoor location estimation based
on LED visible light communication using multiple optical receivers,”
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 1834–1837, Sep. 2013.

LIU et al.: MACHINE LEARNING BASED VISIBLE LIGHT INDOOR POSITIONING WITH SINGLE-LED AND SINGLE ROTATABLE PHOTO DETECTOR 7322511
[21] S.-H. Y ang, H.-S. Kim, Y .-H. Son, and S.-K. Han, “Three-dimensional
visible light indoor localization using AOA and RSS with multiple optical
receivers,”J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 14, pp. 2480–2485, 2014.
[22] R. Zhang, W.-D. Zhong, Q. Kemao, and S. Zhang, “A single LED posi-
tioning system based on circle projection,” IEEE Photon. J., vol. 9, no. 4,
Aug. 2017, Art. no. 7905209.
[23] L. Huang, S. Wen, Z. Y an, H. Song, S. Su, and W. Guan, “Single LED
positioning scheme based on angle sensors in robotics,”Appl. Opt., vol. 60,
no. 21, pp. 6275–6287, 2021.
[24] L. Li, P . Hu, C. Peng, J. Shen, Zhao, and Feng, “Epsilon: A visible light
based positioning system,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des.
Implementation, 2014, pp. 331–343.
[25] Y . Zhuang et al. , “A survey of positioning systems using visible LED
lights,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts. , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1963–1988,
Jul.-Sep. 2018.
[26] T. Komine and M. Nakagawa, “Fundamental analysis for visible-light
communication system using LED lights,”IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 100–107, Feb. 2004.
[27] K. Lee, H. Park, and J. R. Barry, “Indoor channel characteristics for visible
light communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 217–219,
Feb. 2011.
[28] H. Schulze, “Frequency-domain simulation of the indoor wireless op-
tical communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 64, no. 6,
pp. 2551–2562, Jun. 2016.
[29] W. Xu, J. Wang, H. Shen, H. Zhang, and X. Y ou, “Indoor positioning
for multiphotodiode device using visible-light communications,” IEEE
Photon. J., vol. 8, no. 1, Feb. 2016, Art. no. 7900511.
[30] Y . Cai, W. Guan, Y . Wu, C. Xie, Y . Chen, and L. Fang, “Indoor high
precision three-dimensional positioning system based on visible light
communication using particle swarm optimization,” IEEE Photon. J. ,
vol. 9, no. 6, Dec. 2017, Art. no. 7908120.
[31] S. Feng, X. Li, R. Zhang, M. Jiang, and L. Hanzo, “Hybrid positioning
aided amorphous-cell assisted user-centric visible light downlink tech-
niques,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2705–2713, 2016.
[32] X. Liu, D. Zou, N. Huang, and S. Zhang, “A comprehensive accuracy
analysis of visible light positioning under shot noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC
Int. Conf. Commun. China , 2020, pp. 167–172.
[33] N. A. Maung Maung, B. Y . Lwi, and S. Thida, “An enhanced RSS
ﬁngerprinting-based wireless indoor positioning using random forest clas-
siﬁer,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Technol., 2020, pp. 59–63.
[34] X. Guo, S. Shao, N. Ansari, and A. Khreishah, “Indoor localization using
visible light via fusion of multiple classiﬁers,” IEEE Photon. J. ,v o l .9 ,
no. 6, Dec. 2017, Art. no. 7803716.
[35] L. Lian, S. Xia, S. Zhang, Q. Wu, and C. Jing, “Improved indoor positioning
algorithm using KPCA and ELM,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Wireless
Commun. Signal Process., 2019, pp. 1–5.
[36] A. F. Khalifeh, N. AlFasfous, R. Theodory, S. Giha, and K. A. Darabkh,
“On the effect of light emitting diodes positions on the performance of an
indoor visible light communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Russian
Young Researchers Elect. Electron. Eng., 2019, pp. 10–14.